{\rtf1\mac\ansicpg10000\cocoartf824\cocoasubrtf330
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset77 Helvetica-Bold;\f1\fswiss\fcharset77 Helvetica;\f2\fswiss\fcharset77 Helvetica-BoldOblique;
\f3\fnil\fcharset77 Monaco;\f4\froman\fcharset77 Times-Roman;\f5\froman\fcharset77 Times-Bold;
\f6\froman\fcharset77 Times-BoldItalic;\f7\froman\fcharset77 Times-Italic;\f8\fswiss\fcharset77 Helvetica-Oblique;
\f9\froman\fcharset77 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue153;\red0\green0\blue0;
}
\margl1440\margr1440\margb1800\margt1800
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sa240\qc\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sa240\pardirnatural

\f1\b0\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sa240\qc\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs36 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
General methods  for seed dispersal analysis and lab protocols for DNA extraction and genotyping of SSR microsatellites for 
\f2\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Prunus mahaleb
\f0\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 (Rosaceae)\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sa240\pardirnatural

\f1\b0\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sa120\qc\pardirnatural

\f0\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Pedro Jordano & Jos\'8e A. Godoy\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl400\sa60\pardirnatural

\f3\b0\fs20 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sa60\qc\pardirnatural

\f4\fs18 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
with the collaboration of: 
\f5\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Juan Miguel Arroyo
\f4\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, 
\f5\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Cristina Garc\'92a
\f4\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, and additional help with field work from 
\f5\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Juan Luis Garc\'92a-Casta\'96o
\f4\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, 
\f5\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Jes\'9cs G.P. Rodr\'92guez
\f4\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, and 
\f5\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Manuel Carri\'97n
\f4\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sa60\pardirnatural

\fs20 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
\
\pard\tx1984\li1700\ri1410\sl400\sa60\pardirnatural

\f3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
	Contact address:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li1700\ri1410\sl400\sa60\qc\pardirnatural

\f4 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec2 Integrative Ecology Group, Estaci\'97n Biol\'97gica de Do\'96ana, CSIC, Pabell\'97n del Per\'9c, Avda. M. Luisa S/N, E\'d041013 Sevilla, Spain\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8564\li1700\ri1410\sl220\sa60\qc\pardirnatural
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec2 E-mail: \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 \strokec3 jordano@ebd.csic.es\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone \strokec2 , \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 \strokec3 godoy@ebd.csic.es\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone \strokec2 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8564\li1700\ri1410\sl220\sa60\qc\pardirnatural
\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 \strokec3 http://ebd10.ebd.csic.es\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone \strokec2 \
\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 \strokec3 http://ieg.ebd.csic.es\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone \strokec2 \
\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc3 \strokec3 http://www.ebd.csic.es/lem\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone \strokec2 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8564\sl220\sa60\qc\pardirnatural

\f6\i\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec2 \
\
\
A separate document includes a detailed, step by step, description of the lab protocols.
\f4\i0\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8564\sl220\sa60\qc\pardirnatural

\f5\b\fs16 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec2 Acknowledgements
\fs20 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li1700\ri1693\qj\pardirnatural

\f4\b0\fs14 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec0 Over the years, our work has been supported by grants PB96-0857, 1FD97-0743-C03-01, BOS2000-1366-C02-01, and REN2003-00273 from the Comisi\'97n Interministerial de Ciencia y Tec-nolog\'92a, Ministerio de Educaci\'97n y Ciencia and the European Commission, and also by funds from the Consejer\'92a de Educaci\'97n y Ciencia, Junta de Andaluc\'92a (RNM305).\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li1700\ri1693\qc\pardirnatural

\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
Version 1.4. March 2006
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Introduction\
	
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
This is a summary of our protocols for the genetic evaluation of seed dispersal in 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Prunus mahaleb
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 (Rosaceae). They combine seed sampling in the field by means of seed traps- that passively capture seeds dispersed (regurgitated or defecated) by frugivores- and genetic analysis of adult trees and seed endocarps. This enables us to identify uniquely the source tree for a dispersed seed. This method has been previously described in the companion papers (Godoy & Jordano 2001, Jordano and Godoy 2002). Other applications of this approach can be found in the recent work by Ziegenhagen 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
et al
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. (2003), Grivet 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
et al
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. (2005) and Jones 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
et al
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. (2005).\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl400\sa60\pardirnatural

\f3\fs20 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li426\sl400\sa60\pardirnatural

\f7\i\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Study species
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
The study species is 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Prunus mahaleb
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 (L.), a rosaceous tree that in SE Spanish populations is gynodioecious, with individuals producing hermaphrodite flowers and others with androsterile flowers, which behave as functional females. In the southern Iberian Peninsula this species flowers between mid-May and mid-June at high elevations (over 1300 m) and insects, mainly bees (Hymenoptera: Andrenidae, Apidae) and flies (Diptera: Calliphoridae, Syrphidae) act as pollen vectors. 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
P. mahaleb
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 produces fleshy fruits (drupaceous) (Fig. 1) with 1 seed per fruit. In late July fleshy fruits are produced and consumed by frugivorous animals that disperse the seeds until late August or early September.\
\pard\tqr\tx9360\li2267\ri1693\qc\pardirnatural

\f1\fs16 \cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec4 \
\
Figure 1. Flowers and ripe fruits of 
\f8\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
P. mahaleb
\f1\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. Flowers show the typical hermaphrodite tree flower (left) and the androsterile flower (right) of a female tree, with anthers unfunctional and shrunken.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li426\sl400\sa60\pardirnatural

\f4\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li426\sl400\sa60\pardirnatural

\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Description of the main study population\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li426\sl400\sa60\pardirnatural

\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
	Our 9 local 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Prunus mahaleb
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 populations are located in Parque Natural de las Sierras de Cazorla, Segura y Las Villas (Ja\'8en province, SE Spain). In this area 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
P. mahaleb
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 naturally occurs as isolated small (10 trees) to medium-size (150 trees) distinct populations. A few populations might reach ca. 5000 trees. These populations are naturally isolated from each other and occupy an approximate extension of 150 km
\fs16 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\super 2
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\nosupersub .  The main study population was located in Nava de las Correhuelas (NCH), at 1615 m elevation. Detailed descriptions of the area and general methods can be found in Jordano (1994, 1995) and Jordano & Schupp (2000). The site is dominated by grasslands with scattered patches of deciduous vegetation, gravely soil or rock outcrops covered by shrubs or small isolated trees (Fig. 2). The rocky slopes are dominated by open pine forest (
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Pinus nigra 
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
subsp. 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
salzmannii
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
) and juniper (
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Juniperus communis
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
).\
\
\pard\tqr\tx9360\li1984\ri1693\pardirnatural
\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\pard\tqr\tx9360\li1700\ri1977\qj\pardirnatural

\f1\fs16 \cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec4 \
\
Figure 2. General view of the study area; late May, 2005. 
\f8\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
P. mahaleb
\f1\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 trees are flowering, with small white flowers, growing in the deep soil of the \'d4nava\'d5, surrounded by rocky slopes with open pine-juniper forest.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li426\sl400\sa60\pardirnatural

\f4\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec0 \
	Frugivorous birds and mammals visiting 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
P. mahaleb
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 trees in Spanish populations usually behave as legitimate seed dispersers swallowing the fruits whole and defecating and/or regurgitating the seeds, usually after leaving the tree. Most seed rain of 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
P. mahaleb
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 in the study areas is contributed by frugivorous birds. Seed rain and the resulting recruitment pattern of seedlings and saplings are highly patchy, and largely restricted to microhabitats beneath woody cover in the vicinity of fruiting trees \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
(Jordano & Schupp 2000)\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li426\sl400\sa60\pardirnatural

\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
General approach to the direct estimation of seed dispersal distances\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li426\sl400\sa60\pardirnatural

\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
	Our general approach is to compare the multilocus gentoype of the endocarp of dispersed seeds (either defecated or regurgitated by frugivorous animals) with those of potential maternal source trees in the population. Both hermaphrodite and female trees can act as seed sources in the study population, while only hermaphrodites act as pollen donors. The sex ratio is ~1:1 for the two gender types in this population. The endocarp is a maternal tissue (2n) with an identical genotype to the mother tree (Fig. 3). In 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Prunus
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 it is derived from the carpellar wall. Thus, a full matching of the multilocus genotypes of a dispersed seed and a maternal tree unequivocally identifies the tree as the source for the dispersed seed, enabling a direct estimation of the dispersal distance (Fig. 4). \
\pard\tqr\tx9360\li1984\ri1693\qj\pardirnatural

\f1\fs16 \cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec4 Figure 3. Cross section view of a 
\f8\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
P. mahaleb
\f1\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 seed showing the endocarp wall, consisting of wooody tissue and a central embryo filling up the whole seed interior. The seed is ~5.5 mm maximum cross section, and the endocarp thickness is ~1.5 mm.
\f4\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li426\sl400\sa60\pardirnatural
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec0 \
	We have been separately genotyping also the testa tissue; in 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Prunus
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 this is a thin tissue just beneath the endocarp and overlying the embryo. In our analyses we carefully separated the testa when extracting the embryo to get only the endocarp material before homogeneization. The DNA yield of the testa was inssuficient to unequivocally determine its genotype, but we suspect it is also maternally-derived tissue. The embryo is, of course, a distinct diploid (2n) tissue with a contribution of the pollen-donor and a maternal contribution. Then the endosperm is triploid (3n) tissue with a single paternal contribution and two maternal contributions; in a ripe, fully-developed 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Prunus
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 seed it is vestigial. As the seed grows, the embryo displaces the endosperm towards the apical pole so that only a small amount remains in a fully developed, viable seed. \
	To test the identity of the maternal genotype obtained from leaf tissue and the genotype of the seed endocarp, we sampled  1-3 seeds from the branches of 4 trees. In addition, we obtained the endocarp and embryo tissues from 11 seeds among the progeny (5 families) obtained in a diallel cross of known sires and dams obtained in 1992 and 1993; independent DNA extractions and genotypes were obtained from each tissue (P. Jordano, pers. obs.). Thus, for these seeds both the sire and dam trees were known and this allowed us to check the exact matching of the endocarp and leaf genotypes. When comparing embryo to parental genotypes, a strict Mendelian inheritance was observed with no evidence for the occurrence of null alleles \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
(Godoy & Jordano 2001)\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
.
\f3\fs20 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl400\sa60\pardirnatural

\f4\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tqr\tx9360\li1984\ri1693\qj\pardirnatural

\f1\fs16 \cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec4 Figure 4. View of the study area with adult 
\f8\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
P. mahaleb
\f1\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 fruiting trees and schematic, idealized, locations of pairs of seed traps (gray squares) in different microhabitats. Yellow arrows indicate assignments of seeds sampled in traps to their maternal trees, allowing an estimate of dispersal distance (
\f8\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
d
\f1\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
) for each one. A fraction of the seeds sampled do not match any of the adult trees in the population (marked with ?) and are attributed to long-distance dispersal events, i.e., immigrant seeds originating in other populations.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl400\sa60\pardirnatural

\f4\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li426\sl400\sa60\pardirnatural
\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
	We genotyped 472 trees in the 9 populations, including all the 196 adult trees from the main study site, NCH, increasing our previous sample for this population (Godoy & Jordano 2001). In this previous study we sampled leaf tissue for total of 180 adult trees, representing all the reproductives in the main nucleus of the population, during the years 1996-2000. We then added 16 trees in a patch ca. 300 m to the NW, thus totalling all the repoductives in the population. Our population consists of 104 hermaphrodite and 92 female trees scattered and patchily distributed (Fig. 5). We have also genotyped 84 additional young trees that were not reproducing in the 2003 season, totalling 263 individuals in NCH.\
	Seeds dispersed by animals were sampled by setting replicates of 2 seed traps each at different randomly-chosen locations in NCH population (Fig. 5), stratified according to microhabitat type: beneath 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
P. mahaleb
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 trees or other high shrubs (up to 4 m), beneath low shrubs (< 1m height), beneath pine trees either with or without juniper understory, beneath trees with non-endozoochorous dispersed seeds (
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Acer
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Quercus
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
), in open ground with grassy cover, and in rocky substrates (see Jordano & Schupp 2000). The adult reproductive trees in the population were mapped and their locations recorded in a GIS database including also the locations of the sampling sites with seed traps (Fig. 5).\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li1417\sl400\sa60\pardirnatural
\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
   \
\pard\tqr\tx9360\li1700\ri1410\qj\pardirnatural

\f1\fs16 \cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec4 Figure 5. Map of the study area with adult 
\f8\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
P. mahaleb
\f1\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 fruiting trees (
\f8\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
N
\f1\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
= 196) (left) and the locations of pairs of seed traps (
\f8\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
N
\f1\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
= 613) (gray squares, right) in different microhabitats. 
\f4\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li426\sl400\sa60\pardirnatural
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec0 \
	Leaves (small pieces ca. 6 mm diameter) were frozen in liquid nitrogen after sampling and kept at -80 \'a1C until analysis. Seeds were air dried fater sampling and then dessicated in a forced-air oven at <25 \'a1C. They were stored in paper bags until extraction of the endocarps. Dessication at higher temperatures damages the seeds and results in a reduced DNA extraction and amplification success.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li426\sl400\sa60\pardirnatural

\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
DNA extraction and microsatellite genotyping
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
	DNA was extracted from 100-200 mg of fresh leaf tissue, sampled in 1998-1999, using the rapid miniprep method of Cheung 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
et al
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. (1993). We had additional sampling of leaves in 2000. We collected leaf pieces directly from the trees in individual Eppendorf tubes and immediately preserved them frozen in liquid nitrogen. Tissue was homogenized in 320 \'b5L of extraction buffer (200 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 70 mM EDTA, 2 M NaCl, 20 mM sodium bisulfite) with an electric drill (560 W; full speed) with attached plastic disposable pestles (see below for a modification of this grinding protocol). After homogenization 80 \'b5L of 5% sarcosyl was added and the sample was incubated at 65 \'a1C for 30 min and centrifuged at 16000 g for 15 min to remove insoluble material. DNA was precipitated by the addition of 90 \'b5l of 10 M ammonium acetate and 200 \'b5l of isopropanol. The mixture was incubated at room temperature for 5 min and centrifuged for 15 min at 16000 g. The pellet was washed with 70% ethanol, dried and resuspended in 100 \'b5L TE buffer. For the seed endocarps we used a similar protocol with some modifications. An important modification that we introduced since 2001 was the homogeneization of the endocarp tissue with a Rensch electronic grinder (Fig. 6). This increased the DNA yield and we now routinely use this grinder for all types of tissue. The endocarp tissue was introduced in an Eppendorf tube with 1 steel bead, frozen in liquid-nitrogen and grinded for at least 3 min at maximum speed. Tissue was homogenized in 480 \'b5L of extraction buffer, \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
120 \'b5L of 5% sarcosyl was added, the sample was precipitated in 225 \'b5L of 10 M ammonium acetate, \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
and the DNA finally resuspended in 200 \'b5L TLE (200 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 70 mM EDTA).  \
\pard\tqr\tx9360\li1700\ri1410\qj\pardirnatural

\f1\fs16 \cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec4 \
Figure 6. Two views of the electronic grinder (left) and two Eppendorff tubes with a seed and metallic ball (right) and the homogeneized endocarp fater grinding (left). 
\f4\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li426\sl400\sa60\pardirnatural
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec0 \
	We tested a total of 43 primers pairs designed for cultivated 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Prunus
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 and 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Malus
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 species (A. Abbott, 1998, personal communication; G. King, 1998, personal communication; Cipriani et al. 1999; Downey & Iezzoni 2000; Sosinski et al. 2000). Of them 16 showed polymorphism when tested on 8 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
P. mahaleb
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 individuals of several populations. We finally selected a subset of 11 markers that showed polymorphism in 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
P. mahaleb
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 for use in our project (Table 1). \
\pard\tqr\tx9360\li283\ri276\pardirnatural

\f1\fs18 \cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec4 \
\pard\tqr\tx9360\li566\ri276\pardirnatural
\cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec4 \
\
\
\
\
\
Table 1.
\fs16 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 Published names and references for the SSR microsatellite markers used in the study of 
\f8\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Prunus mahaleb.
\f1\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tqr\tx9360\li283\ri1693\pardirnatural
\cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec4 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\fs24 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sa120\qc\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs18 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec0 Name	REFERENCE\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sa240\pardirnatural

\f1\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
UDP96-001\
UDP96-018\
UDP97-403\
UDP98-406\
UDP97-402	Aranzana, M. J., A. Pineda, P. Cosson, E. Dirlewanger, J. Ascasibar, G. Cipriani, C. D. Ryder, R. Testolin, A. Abbott, G. J. King, A. F. Iezzoni, and P. Arus. 2003. A set of simple-sequence repeat (SSR) markers covering the 
\f8\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Prunus
\f1\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 genome. Theoretical and Applied Genetics 
\f0\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
106
\f1\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
: 819-825.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li720\fi-720\sa240\pardirnatural
\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Cipriani, G., G. Lot, W. G. Huang, M. T. Marrazzo, E. Peterlunger, and R. Testolin. 1999. AC/GT and AG/CT microsatellite repeats in peach [
\f8\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Prunus persica
\f1\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 (L) Batsch]: isolation, characterisation and cross-species amplification in Prunus. Theoretical and Applied Genetics 
\f0\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
99
\f1\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
: 65-72.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sa240\pardirnatural
\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
pchgms3\
PS12A02\
pchcms 5\
pchcms4\
PS01H03	Sosinski, B., M. Gannavarapu, L. D. Hager, L. E. Beck, G. J. King, C. D. Ryder, S. Rajapakse, W. V. Baird, R. E. Ballard, and A. G. Abbott. 2000. Characterization of microsatellite markers in peach [
\f8\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Prunus persica
\f1\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 (L.) Batsch]. Theoretical and Applied Genetics 
\f0\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
101
\f1\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
: 421-428.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li720\fi-720\sa240\pardirnatural
\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Downey, S. L., and A. F. Iezzoni. 2000. Polymorphic DNA markers in black cherry (
\f8\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Prunus serotina
\f1\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
) are identified using sequences from sweet cherry, peach, and sour cherry. Journal of the American Society of Horticultural ScienceJ. 
\f0\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
125
\f1\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
: 76-80.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sa240\pardirnatural
\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 MS01A05	Graham King (pers. comm.)
\fs24 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li566\sl400\sa60\pardirnatural

\f4 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li426\sl400\sa60\pardirnatural
\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
	We used the full set of 11 markers for the adult trees, but only used 9 markers for the endocarps due to limited success with amplifications from endocarp tissue for some of the markers. Thus, markers were selected not only because of their polymorphism levels but also to optimize the muiltiplexing in the sequencer, that is, the possibility of running groups of markers, with non-overlapping size ranges, at a time in the sequencer. \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec2 We designed 3 groups of markers with non-overlapping allelic sizes. Each group was labelled with a distinct fluorescent marker (5\'d5 Fam, 5\'d5 Tet or 5\'d5 Hex) and each locus is amplified in an independent PCR reaction. The amplified products are mixed in adequate proportions and analyzed in the Applied Biosystems Model 310. \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec0 With the set of microsatellite markers used, each adult tree in the population showed a unique multilocus genotype.\
	Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification was performed in 20 \'b5l reaction volumes containing 67 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8, 16 mM (NH
\fs16 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\sub 4
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\nosupersub )
\fs16 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\sub 2
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\nosupersub SO
\fs16 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\sub 4
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\nosupersub , 2 mM MgCl
\fs16 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\sub 2
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\nosupersub , 0.01% Tween-20, 0.01% BSA, 0.25 mM of each dNTP, 0.25 \'b5M of each primer, 0.5 U of Taq DNA polimerase\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, and 10.8 \'b5l H
\fs16 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\sub 2
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\nosupersub O\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. Reactions were incubated in a MJ Research PTC-100 thermocycler programmed for a \'d2touchdown\'d3 PCR as follows: an initial denaturation step at 94\'bc C for 2 min; 16 cycles of 92\'bc C for 30 s, annealing at 66-50\'bc C for 30 s (1\'bc C decrease in each cycle), and extension at 72\'bc C for 30 s; 19 cycles of 92\'bc C for 30 s, 50\'bc C for 30 s, and 72\'bc C for 30 s (Table 2). A final extension was programmed at 72\'bc C for 5 min.  Amplified fragments were analyzed using a capillary electrophoresis automated sequencer, ABI 3100 Genetic Analyser (Applied Biosystems). We are currently using this Applied Biosystems Model 3100 sequencer and we label with 5\'d5Fam, 5\'d5Net and 5\'d5Hex frluorescent markers. Previously we used an ABI 377 model. We scored the electropherograms using Genescan 3.1 and Genotyper 3.7 (Applied Biosystems). The scorings were checked haphazardly and separately by two people for consistency. In several cases of doubtful assignements we re-run all the genotyping protocol for the sample.\
\pard\tqr\tx9360\ri1693\pardirnatural

\f1\fs18 \cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec4 \
\pard\tqr\tx9360\pardirnatural
\cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec4 Table 1. Allele frequencies (N) for the 11 SSR microsatellite markers used. Alleles for each locus are identified by their size (bp).
\f4\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tqr\tx9360\li1700\ri1693\pardirnatural
\cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec4 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f1 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sa240\qc\pardirnatural

\fs14 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec0 Fam001	FamMg3	Fam018	Tet403	TetE02	TetMC4	TetMC5	Hex406	Hex402	HexA05	HexH03\
Allele	N	Allele	N	Allele	N	Allele	N	Allele	N	Allele	N	Allele	N	Allele	N	Allele	N	Allele	N	Allele	N\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl144\slmult1\qc\pardirnatural
\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
109	9	176	24	244	204	102	30	143	1	221	237	231	296	93	110	116	2	194	53	249	4\
117	64	178	195	246	216	104	225	145	14	222	109	235	96	95	136	118	5	196	1	251	18\
119	292	186	25			106	22	153	1	226	31			97	167	132	88	198	273	255	1\
121	30	190	28			110	16	159	1	228	41			101	5	134	29	200	86	257	72\
125	2	192	19			112	23	161	8					107	2	136	65	202	7	259	9\
127	20	194	73			116	8	167	79							138	1			261	41\
129	3	196	6			118	2	169	8							142	140			263	19\
		200	1			122	26	173	90							144	6			267	1\
		204	18			124	31	175	2							146	79			269	3\
		206	31			142	37	177	3							148	5			271	55\
								183	188											273	11\
								185	11											275	2\
								187	14											281	1\
																				283	100\
																				287	19\
																				289	20\
																				291	1\
																				295	42\
																				297	1
\fs24 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl400\sa60\pardirnatural

\f4 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec0 \
\pard\tqr\tx9360\li1700\ri1693\pardirnatural

\f1\fs20 \cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec4 \
\pard\tqr\tx9360\li1700\ri1693\pardirnatural

\fs18 \cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec4 \
\
Table 2. Summary of the PCR program protocol.
\fs20 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tqr\tx9360\li1700\ri1693\pardirnatural

\fs16 \cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\strokec4 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\fs24 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\qc\pardirnatural

\fs18 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec0 Step	Temperature	Time\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural
\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
1- initial denaturalization	94 \'bc C	2 min\
2- denaturalization	92 \'bc C	30 s\
3- annealing	66 \'bc C \'d0 1\'bcC / cycle	30 s\
4- extension	72 \'bc C	30 s\
5- repeated cycles	17 cycles of steps 2 to 4	\
6- denaturalization	92 \'bc C	30 s\
7- annealing	50 \'bc C	30 s\
8- extension	72 \'bc C	30 s\
9- repeated cycles	18 cycles of steps 6 to 8	\
10- final extension	72 \'bc C	5 min\
11- refrigeration	4 \'bc C	indefinite
\fs24 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li1700\pardirnatural

\f4 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li426\sl400\sa60\pardirnatural

\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
Source tree identification
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
 	For the study of seed dispersal, a total of 180 adult trees and 95 dispersed seed endocarps were initially genotyped (Godoy & Jordano 2001). We have later expanded this sample to include 263 trees from NCH (of which we use only the 196 reproductives in 2003) and 557 endocarps and this is currently (March 15, 2005) our main analysis dataset. We have also genotyped trees from other 8 populations in addition to NCH, totalling 472 trees. A total of 21 endocarps failed to amplify for \'b3 3 loci and were dropped from analyses. \
	Each adult tree in the NCH population showed a unique multilocus genotype. The source tree for individual dispersed seeds was identified by comparing the endocarp multilocus genotype with the complete set of genotypes of reproductive trees in the population. To assign the source tree for each dispersed seed we carried out an identity check by matching  the multilocus genotype of the endocarp at 9 microsatellite loci with those of the adult trees; for the adult trees we assessed 11 SSR loci. We used the full seed sample from the 1996 (
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
N
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
= 95) and 1997 (
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
N
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
= 462) seed cohorts. We used CERVUS (\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Marshall 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
et al
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
.  1998\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
) and GIMLET (Vali\'8fre 2002) to identify the mismatches and multiple-matches among endocarps and putative source trees. \
	For each sampled seed, the adult individual having a genotype matching the seed endocarp genotype was assigned as the mother tree. In a few cases (
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
N
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
= 27 endocarps) we failed to find evidence that a NCH tree was mother source, yet they had \'b2 2 loci missing and thus we were unable to assign them as immigrant seeds in NCH and we consider them re-assigned NCH seeds. All the seed endocarps except 2 (among those matching NCH tree genotypes) were assigned to a single tree in NCH; 97 endocarps were not assignable to any tree in NCH. Finally, 27 endocarps were dropped from analysis due to amplification failure for >2 loci. We thus had 474 endocarps assigned to the NCH study population. The two seeds with double matching have failed amplifications for two loci and resulted in ambiguous matchig with two putative maternal trees. We assigned the seeds to the tree nearest to the sampling location, due to the fact that this procedure would minimize the estimation errors of dispersal distances when these are distributed with high skew, i.e., a missassignment of a rare long-distance event would seriously bias the estimate of the dispersal function. Significant matches between endocarp and adult genotypes were found by testing a hypothesis of identity (r
\fs16 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\sub p
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\nosupersub = 1, r
\fs16 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\sub m
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\nosupersub = 1) in all possible pairwise comparisons between endocarps and adult trees  and obtaining significance estimates by a jackknife resampling method (Queller & Goodnight 1989). \
\

\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Problems with SSR genotyping\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li426\sl400\sa60\pardirnatural

\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
	There can be some problems at the genotyping and assignment stages when working with seed endocarps, and some of them are quite frequent in paternity analyses. First, stutter bands. They are fairly common when analyzing microstellites, specially with dinucleotide repeats. We have them in amplifications from endocarp extracts but also, and to the same extent, with leaf extracts and with all other species we have worked with. Alleles were assigned to the largest, and most abundant, fragment. Heterozygotes for two close alleles  were recognized by the shortest allele showing a higher intensity than the larger (the intensity of the band being the sum of the short allele and the stutter bands of the long allele). This results in a characteristic pattern clearly distinguishable from the homozygote pattern, in which the intensity of the bands decreases progressively with size. This is described in Hoelzel (1998). We think touchdown PCR will not alleviate the problem of stutter bands. We use it to prevent non-specific products in our heterologous amplifications.\
	Second, null alleles and allelic dropout. Null alleles are alleles that do not amplify, probably because of a mismatch in one of the primers used. They can be suspected if a heterozygote deficit is detected only in some of the loci; they are frequent in paternity analysis \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
(Bj\'9arklund 2005)\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. If null alleles are present, they should appear 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
both
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 in leaf and endocarp extracts. Therefore, we don\'d5t think they would affect the identity checks between seeds and trees, a seed showing a false homozygote will match a tree showing the same pattern. However, this will affect and limit the resolution power and bias the significance values for assignements (see below). We did not discard that null alleles were present in our samples, but we didn\'d5t find them. We observed an heterozigote deficit but in most loci, resulting from high inbreeding in the study population due to frequent selfing. We have not detected null alleles in a few paternity analyses where we used progeny with known paternal and maternal trees, obtained from hand pollinations.\
	Finally, allelic dropout can be a serious problem for the assignment of seeds to mother trees. It occurs when one of the alleles in an heterozygote is not amplified stochastically when using limiting amounts of template DNA, as can be the case when endocarp extracts are used. In the controlled comparisons we made between leaf and endocarp genotypes, allelic dropout was not observed. But this can be a potential problem if the DNA yield or quality is limiting. Repeating the amplification of homozygote loci several times (Taberlet 1996) and accurately determining the concentration of DNA and excluding those samples in the limiting range where allelic dropout can occur (Morin 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
et al. 
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
2001) are two strategies to deal with the problem at the genotyping stage. At the analysis level, any exclusion of identity between a seed and a potential mother tree based on only 1 or 2 loci mismatching was rechecked.\
\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li426\sl400\sa60\pardirnatural

\f6\i\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
References
\f7\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li720\fi-154\ri720\sl400\sa240\pardirnatural

\f4\i0\fs20 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Bj\'9arklund M. 2005 A method for adjusting allele frequencies in the case of microsatellite allele drop-out. Molecular Ecology Notes 
\f5\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
5
\f4\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
: 676-679.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li720\fi-154\sa240\pardirnatural
\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Cheung, W. Y., N. Hubert, and B. S. Landry. 1993. A simple and rapid DNA microextraction method for plant, animal, and insect suitable for RAPD and PCR analyses. PCR Methods and Applications 
\f5\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
3
\f4\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
: 69-70.\
Godoy, J. A., and P. Jordano. 2001. Seed dispersal by animals: exact identification of source trees with endocarp DNA microsatellites. Molecular Ecology 
\f5\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
10
\f4\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
: 2275-2283.\
Grivet, D., P.E. Smouse, and V.L. Sork. 2005. A novel approach to an old problem: tracking dispersed seeds. Molecular Ecology 
\f5\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
14
\f4\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
: 3585-3595.\
Hoelzel, A.R. 1998. 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Molecular genetic analysis of populations: a practical approach
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. Oxfrod University Press, Oxford, UK.\
Jones, A., J. Chen, G. J. Weng, and S. P. Hubbell. 2005. A genetic evaluation of seed dispersal in the Neotropical tree, 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Jacaranda copaia
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 (Bignoniaceae). American Naturalist 
\f5\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
166
\f4\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
: 000-000. 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
In press
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
.\
Jordano, P. 1994. Spatial and temporal variation in the avian-frugivore assemblage of 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Prunus mahaleb
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
: patterns and consequences. Oikos 
\f5\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
71
\f4\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
: 479-491.\
Jordano, P. 1995. Frugivore-mediated selection on fruit and seed size: birds and St. Lucie's cherry, 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Prunus mahaleb
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. Ecology 
\f5\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
76
\f4\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
: 2627-2639.\
Jordano, P., and E. W. Schupp. 2000. Seed disperser effectiveness: the quantity component and patterns of seed rain for 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Prunus mahaleb
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. Ecological Monographs 
\f5\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
70
\f4\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
: 591-615.\
Jordano, P., and J. A. Godoy. 2002. Frugivore-generated seed shadows: a landscape view of demographic and genetic effects. Pages 305-321 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
in
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 D. J. Levey, W. Silva, and M. Galetti, editors. Frugivores and seed dispersal: ecological, evolutionary, and conservation issues. CAB International, Wallingford, UK.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li720\fi-154\ri720\sa240\pardirnatural
\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Marshall TC, Slate J, Kruuk LEB, Pemberton JM. 1998. Statistical confidence  for likelihood-based paternity inference in natural populations. Molecular Ecology 
\f5\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
7
\f4\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
: 639-655\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li720\fi-154\sa240\pardirnatural
\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Morin, P.A., K.E. Chambers, C. Boesch and L. Vigilant. 2001. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis of DNA from non-invasive samples for accurate microsatellite genotyping of wild chimpanzees (
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Pan troglodytes verus
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
). Molecular Ecology 
\f5\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
10
\f4\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
: 1835-1844.\
Taberlet, P. 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
et al
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. 1996. reliable genotyping of samples with very low DNA quantities using PCR. Nucleic Acids Research 
\f5\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
24
\f4\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
: 3189-3194.\
Vali\'8fre, N. 2002. GIMLET: a computer program for analysing genetic individual identification data. Molecular Ecology Notes 
\f5\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
2
\f4\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
: 377\'d0379.\
Ziegenhagen, B., S. Liepelt, V. Kuhlenkamp, and M. Fladung. 2003. Molecular identification of individual oak and fir trees from maternal tissues of their fruits or seeds. Trees-Structure and Function 
\f5\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
17
\f4\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
: 345-350.\
\pard\tx709\li142\fi-142\sl400\sa60\pardirnatural

\f9\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\uc0\u8232 
\f1 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \
\pard\tqc\tx4153\tqr\tx8306\sl400\sa60\qr\pardirnatural

\f4\fs14 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 \nosupersub \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec0 SSR genotyping protocols for 
\f7\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Prunus mahaleb. 
\f4\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
v. 1.1 - Jordano & Godoy - 1.13}